About

 The ECN library is a collection of utility functions and examples that
 demonstrate, for various operating environments, how to get the ECN
 bits (which are part of the IP traffic class) out of the IPv6 or Legacy
 IPv4 header of a datagram (UDP) packet.

	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explicit_Congestion_Notification

 Development of the ECN library was funded by Deutsche Telekom. It is
 published as Open Source (see below) under Free licences, so it can
 easily be embedded into applications of any kind.

 For TCP connections, the operating system already takes care of
 signalling back ECN information using the ECE (ECN echo) and CWR
 (congestion window reduced) mechanisms native to ECN with TCP.
 Therefore, this library is not useful for, or even usable on, TCP
 sockets.

	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explicit_Congestion_Notification#Operation_of_ECN_with_TCP

‣Use case

 This functionality would be used by adaptive managed latency-aware
 applications, such as video streaming, as follows: The client
 application, running in user equipment (such as a laptop, multimedia
 box, or smartphone), would collect the percentage of received packets
 that have the ECN “CE” (congestion experienced) bit combination set,
 and report that regularily (e.g. every 20–50 ms) to the server, which
 can then use a rate-adjusting algorithm (such as SCReAM) to reduce (if
 congestion was experienced) or increase (up to the connection maximum)
 the data rate (e.g. video stream quality and pixel size). Similarily,
 the server can utilise this technology to verify that the packets sent
 from the client back to the server are not congested.

	https://github.com/EricssonResearch/scream

‣Alternatives

 On operating systems that do not support retrieving the IP traffic
 class, using a “raw” socket for receiving datagrams and decoding the IP
 header manually is discussed at several places in the internet. This is
 a rather fragile method.

 For most operating systems, a packet sniffer can be used to retrieve
 the information from the IP header of a connection as well. This method
 has multiple concerns (security-wise, a packet sniffer is always
 problematic; added latency from the sniffing process; a disconnect
 between retrieval of the packet payload and other metadata vs. the
 sniffed IP header) but is a valid alternative for testing. This is
 persued independently in another project. (Which will be linked to from
 here once available.)

Technical details

‣Caveats

‣‣Operating system-specific

‣‣‣Microsoft® Windows®

 Windows does not support setting the traffic class on outgoing packets
 at all. This also affects WSL 1 (Windows Subsystem for Linux, i.e.
 running Linux applications unmodified on Windows, a.k.a. “bash for
 Windows”). Retrieving the traffic class is possible in all supported
 versions of the operating system; it has been tested on Windows 10.

 WSL 2 is a Linux virtual machine with separate networking; if one
 can get it to network at all (lack of IPv6 support, lack of support
 for UDP portforwarding, broken default DNS resolver), it works like
 “proper” Linux, i.e. can set the outgoing traffic class on packets.

‣‣‣NetBSD®, OpenBSD and derivatives thereof

 These operating systems do not support receiving the IP traffic class.
 FreeBSD® and derivatives thereof, such as MidnightBSD, however, do
 support this. The library has been tested on MidnightBSD 1.2 and
 2.0-CURRENT so far.

‣‣‣Solaris

 These operating systems reportedly support receiving the IP traffic
 class at least for IPv6, perhaps also for Legacy IPv4, so a port might
 be welcome.

‣‣Use of “v4-mapped” IPv6 addresses

 Background: with “v4-mapped” addresses, an application can use an IPv6
 socket to listen to not only IPv6 but also Legacy IPv4 connections.
 This can make application design easier (handling only one socket in a
 blocking way, instead of using select or poll on multiple sockets) but
 is inherently fragile and not recommended. The use case of retrieving
 the IP traffic class is especially tricky, as the system has to deal
 with Legacy IPv4 operations on presumably IPv6 sockets, which is not
 universally implemented.

 FreeBSD® and derivatives disable the use of v4-mapped addresses by
 default, so this is not usually a concern on these operating systems.
 If enabled, however, the traffic class cannot be read from such
 connections.

 Linux usually supports this use case on v4-mapped addresses. In fact,
 Android uses only IPv6 sockets internally and so relies on this. It is
 not, however, guaranteed to work on all Linux systems, so its use is
 nevertheless discouraged.

 Windows does not support reading the traffic class from v4-mapped IPv6
 sockets under Winsock2 (the native sockets API). On the other hand,
 applications running under WSL 1 do support this, mirroring Linux
 support. (WSL 2 is unmodified Linux, i.e. supports this as well.)

 Darwin (Mac OSX) also supports v4-mapped sockets, fully, except that
 per-socket setting (ecnbits_tc) of DSCP bits is not possible, only
 the ECN bits of the traffic class are set; using sendmsg(2) with
 ecnbits_mkcmsg to set them per packet, however, works (see c/client).

‣Supported operating environments

 Please refer to the associated README files in each solution for
 further information.

‣‣C / Command line: Unix (Linux including WSL, Darwin/Mac OSX, FreeBSD/MidnightBSD, Winsock2 on Windows)

 The solution for unixoid (BSD sockets) or Winsock2 environments is
 comprised of a library (which can be included in applications) and two
 example programs, a client and a server.

 This solution comes in two flavours: the standard Unix solution (for
 use with BSD sockets) and one adapted for Winsock2. The latter does
 function on all systems supported by the former, but it includes
 massive amounts of compatibility definitions and glue code to make
 things work under Winsock2 as well, so it’s too complex to be a good
 example for regular Unix systems. In addition, the Winsock2 variant
 omits the functionality needed to support setting the outgoing IP
 traffic class, as this is unsupported under Windows and can lead to
 failures to send packets if attempted.

 The standard solution is shipped in the c/ subdirectory of the
 repository, the Winsock2 variant in the ws2/ subdirectory.

‣‣‣The library

 … consists of a C header file (in the inc/ subdirectory) and a static
 and, for Unix, shared library, as well as associated documentation in
 the form of manual pages, as is customary for Unix environments. The
 library source code and manual pages are located in the lib/
 subdirectory.

 This library can be used from all programming languages and frameworks
 that allow calling C libraries, either directly (e.g. from C++) or via
 a foreign function interface (e.g. from Python3). It contains functions
 for:

  • setting up a socket (file descriptor on Unix, SOCKET handle on
    Winsock2) for use with the library

  • (Unix only) setting the default outgoing traffic class on a socket
    (but check above regarding v4-mapped sockets)

  • a native function to receive data from a socket and write the
    traffic class to a supplied extra parameter, which functions like
    recvmsg() but fills in the msg_control and msg_controllen members of
    struct msghdr (Winsock2: the Control member of WSAMSG) itself if
    necessary

  • wrappers around the functions recv(), recvfrom() and recvmsg() as
    well as read() as applied to sockets (with a small semantic
    difference regarding zero-length datagrams) that also write the
    traffic class to a supplied extra parameter

  • macros to validate the received traffic class and split it into DSCP
    and ECN bits, as well as formatting them into human-readable texts

	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differentiated_services
	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explicit_Congestion_Notification

  • utility functions:

      • (Unix only) prepare a control message for use with sendmsg() to
        set the outgoing traffic class for one specific packet

      • (Winsock2 only) replacements for the functions sendmsg() and
        recvmsg() using Unix-style semantics

      • (both) determine whether a socket is IPv6, Legacy IPv4, or
        something else

 To use the library within a framework, the framework must expose the
 bare file descriptor (Winsock2: SOCKET handle) so the library call to
 prepare it can be used, and the framework’s method of receiving packets
 must be replaced with one of the wrapped calls. (The Android library
 (see below) initially did something like this, but it eventually had
 to reimplement the entire network I/O stack creating its own socket
 file descriptors.)

‣‣‣The example server

 The server is called with just one option (the port number to listen on
 on all interfaces) or two (the IP address and port number to listen
 on). It then runs in the foreground, waiting for incoming packets until
 it is aborted with ^C (Ctrl-C). The nōn-Winsock server also accepts an
 argument for what DSCP bits it should set in response packets.

 When a packet arrives, it displays one line of information about the
 packet (see below) and sends four (Unix) packets or one (Winsock2)
 packet back. The return packets contain most of the information
 displayed (see below) except for the user data. The four packets sent
 back by the Unix server differ only in ECN bits (00, 01, 10, 11 are
 sent in this order); the Winsock2 version does not set the outgoing ECN
 bits for the reasons outlined above.

 Besides the example client, suitable packets can be sent with netcat-openbsd.

 The information displayed (and sent back) is:

  • the timestamp of when the server received the packet, in
    server-local time using the UTC timezone

  • whether the packet was truncated (if the internal buffer was too
    small) for either user data or control data (traffic class); this
    should always read notrunc because the buffers should be sized large
    enough and is useful for debugging

  • the source address of the packet (the IP address in square brackets,
    followed by a colon and the port number)

  • which ECN bits were set on the received packets as follows, plus the
    IP traffic class octet as two-digit hexadecimal number in curly
    braces (or double question marks if it could not be determined)
      • no ECN — 00
      • ECT(0) — 10
      • ECT(1) — 01
      • ECN CE — 11
      • ??ECN? — unknown, could not be determined from the packet

  • the user data, i.e. the payload of the packet received, without a
    trailing newline, between angle brackets (this is not sent back)

‣‣‣The example client

 The client is run with two arguments: the IP address (or hostname) of
 the server to connect to, and a port number. The standard variant also
 accepts an optional third parameter setting the outgoing traffic class.

 The client then sends one packet with the payload “hi!” to the server
 (if the server resolves to multiple addresses, all are tried in order)
 and waits for incoming packets from it. One second after the last
 packet was received, it tries the next address or terminates. If no
 address could be reached, it issues an appropriate error message.

 The client also displays, for each packet, a line consisting of:

  • the timestamp of when the client received the answer packet, in
    client-local time using the UTC timezone

  • which ECN bits were set and the traffic class octet in hex (see
    above)

  • the payload between angle brackets

 The client can also be tested against, for example, the daytime
 (udp/13) server built into inetd, and netcat-openbsd (in listening mode).

‣‣‣Screenshot

 ⇒ ss-Unix.png [Screenshot of the Unix/Winsock2 example client and server]

 The screenshot shows four terminal windows:

    upper left: Unix C/CLI server compiled as Linux application, running in WSL 1 on Windows 10
    upper right: Winsock2 C/CLI client compiled with Visual Studio, running on Windows 10
    lower left: Unix C/CLI client running on Debian GNU/Linux
    lower right: Unix C/CLI server running on MidnightBSD

 The red arrows show which client invocation led to which server display line.

‣‣‣Legal

 The entire C/CLI solution, in either variant, is published under The
 MirOS Licence and thus Open Source using the permissive model (use only
 requires attribution).

	http://www.mirbsd.org/MirOS-Licence.htm

‣‣Java & JNI — DatagramSocket, DatagramChannel: Android

 This solution for Android is comprised of two modules (the AAR
 library and an APK demo äpp) in a standard IntelliJ (Android Studio)
 project and is shipped in the android/ subdirectory. It is designed for
 Android 8 “Oreo” (the oldest currently supported release) and newer,
 and is known working on Android 9 and 10 as well, possibly working on
 Android 11 as of 23ʳᵈ December 2020.

 The AAR library is not published to a central Maven repository but
 designed as a component that can be embedded into other projects (with
 a few clicks in Android Studio). It comes in the ecn-lib/ subdirectory,
 whereas the app/ subdirectory holds the example GUI application.

‣‣‣Technical difficulties

 We could identify three ways Android developers would communicate using
 UDP (feel free to suggest more):
  • DatagramSocket
  • DatagramChannel
  • Netty

 We also expect use of libraries, such as WebRTC libraries utilising RTP
 over UDP. To what amount such libraries can be patched to call the
 ECN-Bits library functions remains to be seen.

	https://webrtc.googlesource.com/src/

 The first approach at integrating ECN-Bits support into the Java™
 frameworks was minimal-intrusive: subclass the existing implementations
 and change only what’s necessary. Unfortunately, both OpenJDK and
 Android threw wrenches into this work: OpenJDK does not allow placing
 classes into the java.base Jigsaw module, which java.net.* belong to,
 and Google are hiding functionality from Android SDK users (that is,
 regular äpps), permitting access only for the Android runtime
 environment itself. This was successful for DatagramSocket only and
 unfortunately affected every DatagramSocket created by the äpp, not
 only those that were explicitly created as ECNBitsDatagramSocket.

 The second approach involves implementing the complete lifecycle of a
 datagram channel and socket. This is much larger in scope (although we
 already explicitly excluded IP Multicast) and necessarily cannot mirror
 completely what the system does (again due to lack of access e.g. to
 Android’s CloseGuard) but comes very close. (Thankfully, the
 implementations changed very little between Android 8 and 11, allowing
 us to use the Android 11 code as a base.) This approach allows the use
 of DatagramChannel including its socket() adapter, as well as almost
 drop-in compatible support for DatagramSocket; this should allow both
 OIO and NIO modes of Netty to work as well.

 This approach is currently being finalised and will also be the base of
 a desktop/server JRE solution. Unfortunately, some methods are still
 not called or callable, so it’s only close to being a drop-in solution.

 The best fix would be a Google-provided API to access the IP traffic
 class, ideally even in stock OpenJDK. No such API exists as of the time
 of this writing.

‣‣‣Network difficulties

 Note that networks may not pass along the ECN bits (or the IP traffic
 class byte really). In particular, the Android emulator does not
 support passing that information along. For testing, you can run the
 client äpp against a CLI server running under adb shell; it would be
 best to test this on bare metal (real physical smartphones); note that
 most phones will refuse the installation of an unsigned äpp, so either
 install the debug APK or apksign the äpp before installing.

‣‣‣The example application

 The example Android äpp is only a client. It draws a UI which has input
 fields for IP address or hostname, port, and outgoing traffic class,
 like the C/CLI example client. It also has two buttons:

  • Send Packet: uses ECNBitsDatagramSocket to send out a packet and
    wait 1 s for answers, like the CLI client does

  • Start Channel: uses ECNBitsDatagramChannel to continously send
    and receive packets in multiple threads

  • Licences: displays what Google’s standard library thinks are the
    licences of the dependencies of the äpp

 Below the buttons, textual output (output lines separated with thin
 lines) will be shown; the content is similar to what the C/CLI example
 client shows, except the payload is displayed after a linebreak
 (portrait format) or ‘│’ separator (landscape format).

‣‣‣Screenshot

 ⇒ ss-Android.png [Screenshot of the Android example client app]

 This screenshot shows an AVD emulator on the right-hand side, which
 runs the example client äpp. On the left-hand side, it shows two adb
 shell windows, the upper executing the C/CLI server, the lower
 executing the client. The first server line was caused by the CLI
 client, the second by the Android äpp client.

 The C/CLI client and server used in this example were compiled to match
 the target CPU (x86 for the emulator, ARM for real hardware) and
 statically linked using musl libc, so they run directly on the Linux
 kernel that underlies Android, without going through the Android
 frameworks.

	https://musl.libc.org/

‣‣‣Legal

 Most of the Android solution, as much as copyright law applies to it
 (some parts are from the Android Studio template or SDK documentation),
 is, like the C/CLI solution, published under The MirOS Licence and thus
 Open Source using the permissive model (use only requires attribution).

	http://www.mirbsd.org/MirOS-Licence.htm

 Some parts of the Android library are copied from the system
 implementation. These parts are published under the GNU GPL, version 2
 only, with the GNU Classpath Exception, as outlined in its LICENCE
 file. As long as you only use the library in an otherwise independent
 project, the conditions of the GPL do not apply to the whole, but you
 will have to give the source code of the ECN-Bits Android library to
 recipients of your program. (If you don’t modify the library, pointing
 them to the ECN-Bits project or bundling it alongside your software
 will usually be sufficient.)

	https://github.com/tarent/ECN-Bits/blob/master/android/ecn-lib/src/main/resources/META-INF/legal/de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.android/lib/COPYING
	https://github.com/tarent/ECN-Bits/blob/master/android/ecn-lib/src/main/resources/META-INF/legal/de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.android/lib/LICENCE

 The Android solution also includes parts of an independent module
 (Android libnativehelper) under the Apache 2 licence.

	https://github.com/tarent/ECN-Bits/blob/master/android/ecn-lib/src/main/resources/META-INF/legal/de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.android/lib/LICENSE-2.0

 Note that all three of these licences apply to the ECN-Bits Android
 library, so all three must be adhered to: the Apache 2 licence for the
 “nh” module *only*; both MirBSD and GPLv2 with Classpath Exception for
 the OpenJDK‑/Android-libcore-derived code in this project, and just The
 MirOS Licence for the rest of this project.

‣‣Java & JNI — DatagramSocket, DatagramChannel: OpenJDK/JRE

 Support for desktop and server Java™ has been implemented based on
 Android support. This is limited to some platforms, namely Linux,
 with the requirement to compile the JNI part for the target platform
 (as there is no “nice” way to provide JNI libraries for “all” possible
 platforms; using JNA in a second JDK solution is being discussed).

‣‣‣The example applications

 The jdk-linux solution ships with two examples, again just clients,
 which are provided as Main classes, with small wrapper shell scripts
 to call them easily. See jdk-linux/README for more details on the
 options and arguments they take.

 The DatagramSocket client (./client.sh) behaves in almost exactly the
 same way as the C/CLI example client does.

 The DatagramChannel client (./channel.sh) is a Swing GUI application
 that can send out individual packets on button press, displays all
 incoming packets similar to how the Android äpp does it, can change
 the IP traffic class octet for outgoing packets on the fly and switch
 between the peer’s IP addresses; it also shows congestion measurements.

‣‣‣Screenshot

 ⇒ ss-Swing.png [Screenshot of the Channel example client program]

 This screenshot shows the DatagramChannel client against a C/CLI server
 running on localhost after having sent two and received eight packets
 and manually triggering measurement.

‣‣‣Legal

 This solution is covered by the same terms as the Android solution.

‣‣C++ (and C): UWP (Universal Windows Platform)

 Support is tentatively being implemented using the C library functions
 inside the WebRTC library.

	https://github.com/webrtc-uwp/webrtc-uwp-sdk/tree/releases/m71

‣‣C♯/VB.net: Windows/Mono .net Common Language Runtime

 While support for this platform might be worthwhile, there currently is
 none yet.

‣‣Apple iOS

 While support for this platform is worthwhile, there currently is none
 yet. Since this works well on Darwin, it will probably work out-of-the-box
 on iOS.

‣Utilising the library

 See the individual solutions’ README files for compilation
 instructions.

‣‣C solution

 For environments that support inclusion of C libraries directly, such
 as C++, include the appropriate header <ecn-bits.h> (Unix) or
 <ecn-bitw.h> (Winsock2) after any necessary network headers such as
 <sys/socket.h> and network headers (Unix) or <winsock2.h> and
 <ws2tcpip.h> (Windows). Then link the application against -lecn-bits
 (Unix), -lecn-bitw (Winsock2 on Unix) or ecn-bitw.lib (Windows). Mind
 that the Unix library is available as static and shared library; use
 the static library (possibly build the library with NOPIC=Yes) if it is
 to not become a run-time dependency (or use LDSTATIC=-static to force
 linking the executables statically). The Winsock2 version also includes
 helper functions for better high-level language support; on Windows, a
 DLL will be created by default (link against the ecn-bitw_imp.lib import
 library), build with NOPIC=1 for a static library instead.

 For environments with a foreign function interface, convert the
 information found in the appropriate header (see above) to FFI bindings
 and link against the appropriate library (see above) or dynamically
 load it.

 At a minimum, call ecnbits_prep() to set up the socket and use
 ecnbits_rdmsg() or one of the wrapper functions to receive packets.

 High-level languages would usually call ecnhll_prep() and ecnhll_recv().
XXX insert links to their documentation here

 Please read the example client and/or server program source code to see
 how this works.

‣‣‣Darwin (Mac OSX, iOS)

 Darwin Kernel Version 19.6.0 (Mac OS X 10.15.6 Catalina) is tested.
 Older versions might work. Newer versions might work… unless the
 library‑/loader-related changes broke anything relevant.

 It is unknown whether this works on iOS, as it’s not not intended
 for users to obtain local shell access, build and run CLI programs.

‣‣‣Linux 2.6.14+, FreeBSD 5.2+ (and derivatives like MidnightBSD), Windows 10

 should work out of the box

‣‣‣Windows Server 2016 and newer

 should work, untested

‣‣‣Solaris

 can probably be ported to this system if there is interest

‣‣Android solution

 Import the ecn-lib/ subdirectory into your project. According to the
 documentation it will become part of your project’s source code.

	https://developer.android.com/studio/projects/android-library#AddDependency

 Create an ECNBitsDatagramChannel or ECNBitsDatagramSocket instead of a
 simple DatagramChannel or DatagramSocket and use the return value of
 its retrieveLastTrafficClass() method with the
 de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.android.lib.Bits enum’s static methods. To
 automatically collect statistics over received packets, the
 startMeasurement() and getMeasurement(boolean continue) methods exist.

‣‣‣DatagramPacket caveat

 With DatagramPacket-using APIs (either an
 ECNBitsDatagramChannel.socket() or an ECNBitsDatagramSocket), if you
 wish to reuse the DatagramPacket you must (re‑)set the length before
 each call as no access to only the “received length” is provided to
 applications. This is true in general, both for OpenJDK and Android,
 but at least the latter lets you get away with not doing so for the
 stock DatagramSocket (although not for DatagramChannel.socket(),
 interestingly enough).

‣‣‣Missing functionality (as far as known)

  • IP Multicast and all related socket options
  • extended socket options
  • Android BlockGuard and CloseGuard
  • Android socket tagging, to some amount
    (DatagramChannel-style tagging is attempted)
  • missing from DatagramSocket only
      • signalling of blocked threads
      • some retry handling
      • peek() — using peekData() instead
      • proper dataAvailable() — the overridden method would never be
        called, so it always returns 0
  • missing from DatagramSocket and adapted DatagramChannel.socket() only
      • setting (only) the “received length” in DatagramPacket (see above)
  • some functionality is untested (binding, unconnected operation,
    disconnecting, peeking, most socket options, unblocked I/O, and exots
    like TTL, scatter/gather I/O)

‣‣‣Android 8, 9, 10, 11

 … should work out of the box

‣‣OpenJDK/JNI solution

 Compile the solution with “mvn clean install” then add an appropriate
 dependency to your project, for example this for Maven:

	<dependency>
		<groupId>de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.jdk</groupId>
		<artifactId>jni</artifactId>
		<version>0.3-SNAPSHOT</version>
	</dependency>

 Adjust the version to match the one in the jdk-linux/pom.xml file.
 It is recommended to use a release version, not a snapshot version;
 however, the ECN-Bits repository is likely to always contain the
 latter due to technical limitations, but you can release it locally.

 For gradle, this would be:

	implementation 'de.telekom.llcto.ecn_bits.jdk:jni:0.3-SNAPSHOT'

 It is also possible to add the solution as module to one’s own
 multi-module Maven project.

 Everything else is identical to the Android solution.

 This has been tested with OpenJDK 11 but should run on JRE 8 and above
 but below 15 (because 15 ships JEP 373 which reimplements DatagramSocket).

	https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/373

Download

 The ECN-Library source code repository, which contains all of the
 solutions outlined above, including extra documentation, can be
 downloaded from the public GitHub project:

  • https://github.com/tarent/ECN-Bits

 Due to the fact that the libraries themselves are rather small, and the
 extra usage examples are the primary value of the repository, no
 pre-compiled binaries are distributed.

‣Note for users of git on Windows®

 The git repository *must* be cloned with symbolic links *enabled*.

	https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/wiki/Symbolic-Links
